.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" chdman.1
.\"
.\" Man page created from source and usage information by 
.\" Ashley T. Howes <debiandev@ashleyhowes.com>, February 2005
.\" updated by Cesare Falco <cesare.falco@gmail.com>, February 2007
.\"
.TH CHDMAN 1 2012-03-25 0.145u5 "MAME Compressed Hunks of Data (CHD) manager"
.\"
.\" NAME chapter
.SH NAME
chdman \- MAME Compressed Hunks of Data (CHD) manager
.\"
.\" SYNOPSIS chapter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B chdman
.I option switches
.\"
.\" DESCRIPTION chapter
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chdman
is the (C)ompressed (H)unks of (D)ata (CHD) manager for MAME.
It is a tool to manage CHD images.
.\"
.\" OPTIONS chapter
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \info \fIinput\fR.chd
Dump the header information from a drive image.
.TP
.B verify \fIinput\fR.chd
Validate the MD5/SHA1 on a drive image.
.TP
.B createraw \fIinputhd\fR.raw \fIoutput\fR.chd [\fIinputoffs\fR [\fIhunksize\fR]]
Create a new compressed raw image from a raw file.
.TP
.B createhd \fIinputhd\fR.raw \fIoutput\fR.chd [\fIinputoffs\fR [\fIcylinders \
heads sectors \fR[\fIsectorsize\fR [\fIhunksize\fR]]]]
Create a new compressed hard disk image from a raw file.
.TP
.B createcd \fIinput\fR.toc \fIoutput\fR.chd
Create a new compressed CD image from a raw file.
.TP
.B createld \fIinput\fR.toc \fIoutput\fR.chd
Create a new compressed laserdisc image from a raw file.
.TP
.B extractraw \fIinput\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.raw
Extract a raw file from a CHD image.
.TP
.B extracthd \fIinput\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.toc \fIoutput\fR.bin
Extract a hard disk block image from a CHD image.
.TP
.B extractcd \fIinput\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.toc \fIoutput\fR.bin
Extract a CDRDAO .toc/.bin, CDRWIN .bin/.cue, or Sega Dreamcast .GDI file from a CHD\-CD image.
.TP
.B extractld \fIinput\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.toc \fIoutput\fR.bin
Extract a laserdisc image from a CHD\-LD image.
.TP
.B copy \fIinput\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.chd
Copy all hunks of data from one CHD file to another. The hunk sizes do not need to match.
If the source is shorter than the destination, the source data will be padded with 0s.
.\"
.\" SWITCHES chapter
.SH SWITCHES
.TP
.B \-\-chs, \-chs \fIcylinders,heads,sectors
Specifies CHS geometry values for CHD harddisks.
.TP
.B \-\-compression, \-c \fInone\fR|\fItype1\fR[,\fItype2\fR[,...]]
Which compression codecs to use (up to 4).
.TP
.B \-\-force, \-f
Force overwriting an existing file.
.TP
.B \-\-help, \-h
Shows the available switches for an option.
.TP
.B \-\-hunksize, \-hs \fIbytes
Size of each unit, in hunks.
.TP
.B \-\-ident, \-id \fIfilename
Name of ident file to provide CHS information.
.TP
.B \-\-input, \-i \fIfilename
Input file name.
.TP
.B \-\-inputstartbyte, \-isb \fIoffset
Starting byte offset within the input.
.TP
.B \-\-inputstarthunk, \-ish \fIoffset
Starting hunk offset within the input.
.TP
.B \-\-inputbytes, \-ib \fIlength
Effective length of the input in bytes.
.TP                              
.B \-\-inputhunks, \-ih \fIlength
Effective length of the input in hunks.
.TP
.B \-\-inputparent, \-ip \fIfilename
Parent CHD's input file name.
.TP
.B \-\-numprocessors, \-np \fIcount
Limits the number of processors to use during compression.
.TP
.B \-\-sectorsize, \-ss \fIbytes
size of each hard disk sector.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose, \-v
Output additional information about the operation.
.TP
.B \-\-output, \-o \fIfilename
Output file name.
.TP
.B \-\-outputbin, \-ob \fIfilename
Output binary file name for extractcd.
.TP
.B \-\-outputparent, \-op \fIfilename
Parent CHD's output file name.
.TP
.B \-\-unitsize, \-us \fIbytes
Size of each unit, in bytes.

