.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" chdman.1
.\"
.\" Man page created from source and usage information by 
.\" Ashley T. Howes <debiandev@ashleyhowes.com>, February 2005
.\" updated by Cesare Falco <cesare.falco@gmail.com>, February 2007
.\"
.TH CHDMAN 1 2010-06-26 0.138u4 "chdman"
.\"
.\" NAME chapter
.SH NAME
chdman \- MAME Compressed Hunks of Data (CHD) manager
.\"
.\" SYNOPSIS chapter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B chdman
.I option file
.\"
.\" DESCRIPTION chapter
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chdman
is the (C)ompressed (H)unks of (D)ata (CHD) manager for MAME.
It is a tool to manage CHD images.
.\"
.\" OPTIONS chapter
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-info \fIinput\fR.chd
Dump the header information from a drive image.
.TP
.B \-createraw \fIinputhd\fR.raw \fIoutput\fR.chd [\fIinputoffs\fR [\fIhunksize\fR]]
Create a new compressed raw image from a raw file.
.TP
.B \-createhd \fIinputhd\fR.raw \fIoutput\fR.chd [\fIinputoffs\fR [\fIcylinders \
heads sectors \fR[\fIsectorsize\fR [\fIhunksize\fR]]]]
Create a new compressed hard disk image from a raw file.
.TP
.B \-createblankhd \fIoutput\fR.chd \fIcylinders heads sectors\fR [\fIsectorsize \
\fR[\fIhunksize\fR]]
Create a new non\-compressed hard disk image, with all hunks filled with 0s.
.TP
.B \-createcd \fIinput\fR.toc \fIoutput\fR.chd
Create a new compressed CD image from a raw file.
.TP
.B \-copydata \fIinput\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.chd
Copy all hunks of data from one CHD file to another. The hunk sizes do not need to match.
If the source is shorter than the destination, the source data will be padded with 0s.
.TP
.B \-extract \fIinput\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.raw
Extract a raw file from a CHD image.
.TP
.B \-extractcd \fIinput\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.toc \fIoutput\fR.bin
Extract a CDRDAO .toc/.bin file from a CHD\-CD image.
.TP
.B \-verify \fIinput\fR.chd
Validate the MD5/SHA1 on a drive image.
.TP
.B \-verifyfix \fIinput\fR.chd
Validate and fix the MD5/SHA1 on a drive image.
.TP
.B \-update \fIinput\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.chd
Update CHD image using metadata from input file.
.TP
.B \-chomp \fIinput\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.chd \fImaxhunk
Chomp hunk from CHD image.
.TP
.B \-merge \fIparent\fR.chd \fIdiff\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.chd
Merge a parent and its child together.
.TP
.B \-diff \fIparent\fR.chd \fIcompare\fR.chd \fIdiff\fR.chd
Generate a difference between two CHD files.
.TP
.B \-setchs \fIinout\fR.chd \fIcylinders heads sections
Change the CHS values on a hard disk image.
.TP
.B \-split \fIinput\fR.chd \fIoutput\fR.chd \fIlength
Split a CHD file into multiple parts.
