.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" ldplayer.1
.\"
.\" Man page created from source and usage information by 
.\" Cesare Falco <c.falco@ubuntu.com>, August 2008
.\"
.TH LDPLAYER 1 2012-03-25 0.145u5 "ldplayer"
.\"
.\"
.\" NAME chapter
.SH NAME
ldplayer \- MAME laserdisc image player
.\"
.\"
.\" SYNOPSIS chapter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ldplayer pr8210 
\-rompath \fI/path/to/pr8210.zip\fP\fB\\;\fP\fI/path/to/image.chd\fP
.\"
.\"
.\" DESCRIPTION chapter
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ldplayer
is an optional utility that simply plays the audio and video from laserdisc
CHD files. It actually emulates and therefore behaves just like a real
laserdisc player \- you can pause, fast-forward, rewind, and all the rest.
.\"
.\"
.\" NOTES chapter
.SH NOTES
First of all, you need to go to your MAME ROMs folder and make a copy of
\fBcubeqst.zip\fP (the ROMs for Cube Quest). Rename it as \fBpr8210.zip\fP. 
.P
Next, run ldplayer. 
Note that the first path in the \fB\-rompath\fP option is the full path 
to the \fBpr8210.zip\fP file and the second is the full path to the laserdisc 
CHD file you wish to play. \fINote\fP the backslash and the semicolon  
\- \fB\\;\fP \- between them. 
.P
Once ldplayer is running, you can hit \fBTAB\fP like usual and check out 
Inputs (this game) to see the controls. Space is the Play/Pause button, for 
instance. Note that some laserdiscs (notably Cube Quest) have 30 seconds or 
more of nothing at the start, so you either need to be patient or use 
fast-forward to start seeing video.
.\"
.\"
.\" FILES chapter
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /etc/mame/ldplayer.ini
Main configuration file.
