.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" imgtool.1
.\"
.\" Man page created from usage info and imgtool.txt
.\" Cesare Falco <c.falco@ubuntu.com>, February 2011
.\"
.\"
.TH IMGTOOL 1 2015-07-22 0.164 "MESS media image manipulation tool"
.\"
.\"
.\" NAME chapter
.SH NAME
imgtool \- MESS media image manipulation tool
.\"
.\"
.\" SYNOPSIS chapter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B imgtool create
.I format image
.RI [ option " ...]"
.br
.B imgtool dir
.I format image
.RI [ path ]
.br
.B imgtool get
.I format image file
.RI [ newname ]
.RB [ \-\-filter=\c
.IR filter ]
.RB [ \-\-fork=\c
.IR fork ]
.br
.B imgtool put
.IR "format image file " ...
.RI [ newname ]
.RI [ option " ...]"
.RB [ \-\-filter=\c
.IR filter ]
.RB [ \-\-fork=\c
.IR fork ]
.br
.B imgtool getall
.I format image
.RI [ path ]
.RB [ \-\-filter=\c
.IR filter ]
.br
.B imgtool del
.IR "format image file " ...
.br
.B imgtool mkdir
.I format image directory
.br
.B imgtool rmdir
.IR "format image directory " ...
.br
.BR "imgtool readsector" | writesector
.I format image track head sector file
.br
.B imgtool identify
.I image
.br
.BR "imgtool listformats" | listfilters
.br
.B imgtool
.B listdriveroptions
.I format
.\"
.\"
.\" DESCRIPTION chapter
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B imgtool
is a tool for the maintenance and manipulation of disk and
other types of images that MESS users need to deal with. Functions
include retrieving and storing files and CRC checking and validation.
Image files can also be within .zip files.
.\"
.\"
.\" OPTIONS chapter
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B create
Creates and image. Optional, image\-specific parameters can be
specified, see
.B imgtool listdriveroptions
command for a full list.
.TP
.B dir
Lists the contents of an image.
.TP
.B get
Gets a single file from an image. A filter can be specified to convert 
custom file formats to ASCII, see
.B imgtool listfilters
command for a full list. File can optionally be renamed.
.TP
.B put
Puts file(s) on an image (wildcards and rename supported).
Filters are supplied to convert ASCII files to custom file formats,
see
.B imgtool listfilters
command for a full list.
.TP
.B getall
Gets all files off an image. Filters can be specified to convert
custom file formats to ASCII, see
.B imgtool listfilters
command for a full list.
.TP
.B del
Deletes a file on an image.
.TP
.B mkdir
Create a directory on an image.
.TP
.B rmdir
Delete directories on an image.
.TP
.B readsector
Extract content of a single sector from an image to a file.
.TP
.B writesector
Write file content to a specific sector on an image.
.TP
.B identify
Try to recognize the format of an image file.
.TP
.B listformats
Lists all image file formats supported by imgtool.
.TP
.B listfilters
Lists all filters supported by imgtool.
Filters are a mean to process data being written into or read out
of an image in a certain way.
.TP
.B listdriveroptions
Lists all format\-specific options for 
.B imgtool put
and 
.B imgtool create
commands.
.\"
.\"
.\" EXAMPLES chapter
.SH EXAMPLES
.B imgtool dir coco_jvc_rsdos myimageinazip.zip
.P
.B imgtool get coco_jvc_rsdos myimage.dsk myfile.bin mynewfile.txt 
.P
.B imgtool getall coco_jvc_rsdos myimage.dsk
.\"
.\"
.\" SEE ALSO chapter
.SH SEE ALSO
mess (6)
